CodeQL extension for VS Code docs update (#12321)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/running-codeql-queries-at-scale-with-mrva.rst

    :width: 350
    :alt: Screenshot of the CodeQL extension in Visual Studio Code. The "Variant Analysis Repositories" section is expanded and the "Set up controller repository" button is highlighted with a dark orange outline.

#. In Visual Studio Code, click **QL** in the left sidebar to display the CodeQL extension.

#. Expand **Variant Analysis Repositories** and click **Set up controller repository** to display a field for the controller repository.

#. Type the owner and name of the repository on GitHub.com that you want to use as your controller repository and press the **Enter** key.

#. If you are prompted to authenticate with GitHub, follow the instructions and sign into your personal or organization account. When you have finished following the process, a prompt from GitHub Authentication may ask for permission to open a URI in Visual Studio Code, click **Open**.

The name of the controller repository is saved in your settings for the CodeQL extension. For information on how to edit the controller repository, see ":ref:`Customizing settings <customizing-settings>`."

Running a query at scale using variant analysis
-----------------------------------------------

> #. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists which include a selection 10, 100, and 1,000 public repositories on GitHub.com for the language that you are analyzing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists which include a selection of 10, 100, and 1,000 public repositories on GitHub.com for the language that you are analyzing.
```

> #. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists of the top 10, top 100, and top 1,000 public repositories on GitHub.com. These are ranked by considering various metrics such as number of stars, number of watchers, number of forks etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists which include a selection 10, 100, and 1,000 public repositories on GitHub.com for the language that you are analyzing.
```

:tocdepth: 1

.. _running-codeql-queries-at-scale-with-mrva:

Running CodeQL queries at scale with multi-repository variant analysis
======================================================================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-mrva.rst

About multi-repository variant analysis
---------------------------------------

When you write a query to find variants of a security vulnerability and finish testing it locally, the next step is to run it on a large group of repositories. Multi-repository variant analysis (variant analysis) makes it easy run a query on up to 1000 repositories without leaving Visual Studio Code.

The core functionality of the CodeQL extension helps you write queries and run them locally against a CodeQL database. In contrast, variant analysis allows you to send your CodeQL query to GitHub.com to be tested against a list of repositories.

> When you run variant analysis against a list of repositories, your query is run against each repository that has a CodeQL database available to analyze. GitHub creates and stores CodeQL databases for thousands of public repositories, including every repository that runs code scanning using CodeQL. If you want to run variant analysis on your repositories, you need to enable code scanning using CodeQL on GitHub.com before adding your repository to a list for analysis (either default setup, or advanced setup using the CodeQL action). For information about enabling code scanning using CodeQL, see "`Configuring code scanning automatically <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/code-scanning/automatically-scanning-your-code-for-vulnerabilities-and-errors/configuring-code-scanning-for-a-repository#configuring-code-scanning-automatically>`__."

Reviewer: Good question @aeisenberg. I think stating that we only store the most  recently created CodeQL database from the default branch should be sufficient.

You must define a controller repository before you can run your first variant analysis.

.. image:: ../images/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/controller-repository.png
    :width: 350
    :alt: Screenshot of the CodeQL extension in Visual Studio Code. The "Variant Analysis Repositories" section is expanded and the "Set up controller repository" button is highlighted with a dark orange outline.

#. In Visual Studio Code, click **QL** in the left sidebar to display the CodeQL extension.

#. Expand **Variant Analysis Repositories** and click **Set up controller repository** to display a field for the controller repository.

#. Type the owner and name of the repository on GitHub.com that you want to use as your controller repository and press the **Enter** key.

> #. If you are prompted to authenticate with GitHub, follow the instructions and sign into your pesonal or organization account. When you have finished following the process, a prompt from GitHub Authentication may ask for permission to open a URI in Visual Studio Code, click **Open**.

Reviewer 2: Typo
```suggestion
#. If you are prompted to authenticate with GitHub, follow the instructions and sign into your personal or organization account. When you have finished following the process, a prompt from GitHub Authentication may ask for permission to open a URI in Visual Studio Code, click **Open**.
```

The name of the controller repository is saved in your settings for the CodeQL extension. For information on how to edit the controller repository, see ":ref:`Customizing settings <customizing-settings>`."

Running a query at scale using variant analysis
-----------------------------------------------

#. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists of the top 10, top 100, and top 1000 public repositories on GitHub.com. These are ranked by considering various metrics such as number of stars, number of watchers, number of forks etc.

#. Select which GitHub repository or repositories you want to run your query against.

   - Click **Top X repositories** to select this list of public repositories for analysis.
   - Click **LIST-NAME** to select a custom list for analysis (see :ref:`later in this article <custom-lists>` for details).

>    - Click **Add new database**, the **+** icon, to add a repository or an organization to the panel, then click to select it for analysis.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the `then click to select it for analysis.` part of this sentence.

Author: Thanks. I'll rewrite this to make it clearer.

#. Open the query you want to run, right-click in the query file, and select **CodeQL: Run Variant Analysis** to start variant analysis.

The CodeQL extension builds a CodeQL pack with your library and any library dependencies. The CodeQL pack and your selected repository list are posted to an API endpoint on GitHub.com which triggers a GitHub Actions dynamic workflow in your controller repository. The workflow spins up multiple parallel jobs to execute the CodeQL query against the repositories in the list, optimizing query execution. As each repository is analyzed, the results are processed and displayed in a Variant Analysis Results view in Visual Studio Code.

.. pull-quote::

    Note

    If you need to cancel the variant analysis run for any reason, click **Stop query** in the Variant Analysis Results view.

Exploring your results
----------------------

> When you run variant analysis, as soon as a workflow to run your analysis on GitHub is running, a Variant Analysis Results view opens to display the results as soon as they are ready. You can use this view to monitor progress, see any errors, and access the workflow logs in your controller repository.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps, to avoid repetition
```suggestion
When you run variant analysis, as soon as a workflow to run your analysis on GitHub is running, a Variant Analysis Results view opens to display the results as they are ready. You can use this view to monitor progress, see any errors, and access the workflow logs in your controller repository.
```

When your variant analysis run is scheduled, the results view automatically opens. Initially the view shows a list of every repository that was scheduled for analysis. As each repository is analyzed, the view is updated to show a summary of the number of results. To view the detailed results for a repository (including results paths), click the repository name.

For each repository, you can see:

- Number of results found by the query
- Visibility of the repository
- Whether analysis is still running (black, moving circle) or finished (green checkmark)
- Number of stars the repository has on GitHub
- When the repository was last updated

To see the results for a repository:

.. image:: ../images/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/variant-analysis-result.png
    :alt: Screenshot of an example result in the "Variant Analysis Results" view. The result has blue links to the source files in GitHub so you can go straight to the repository to fix the problem. There is also a "Show paths" link because this is a data flow query.

#. Click the repository name to show a summary of each result.

> #. Explore the information available for each result using links to the source files in GitHub.com and, for data flow queries, the **Show paths** link. For more information, see "ref:`Exploring data flow with path queries <exploring-data-flow-with-path-queries>`."

Reviewer: Broken link due to missing `:`.

```suggestion
#. Explore the information available for each result using links to the source files in GitHub.com and, for data flow queries, the **Show paths** link. For more information, see ":ref:`Exploring data flow with path queries <exploring-data-flow-with-path-queries>`."
```

Exporting your results
----------------------

You can export your results for further analysis or to discuss them with collaborators. In the results view, click **Export results** to export the results to a secret gist on GitHub.com or to a markdown file in your workspace.

.. _custom-lists:

Creating custom lists of repositories
-------------------------------------

After you have defined a controller repository, the Variant Analysis Repositories panel shows the lists of repositories that you can select for variant analysis. You can use the options in the panel header to add a specific repository or organization to the panel, and to create and manage custom lists of repositories for variant analysis.

.. pull-quote::

    Note

>     CodeQL analysis always requires a CodeQL database to run queries against. When you run variant analysis against a list of repositories, your query will only be executed against the repositories that currently have a CodeQL database available to download.  So the best way to make a repository available for variant analysis is to enable code scanning with CodeQL. For information about enabling code scanning using CodeQL, see "`Configuring code scanning automatically <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/code-scanning/automatically-scanning-your-code-for-vulnerabilities-and-errors/configuring-code-scanning-for-a-repository#configuring-code-scanning-automatically>`__."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    CodeQL analysis always requires a CodeQL database to run queries against. When you run variant analysis against a list of repositories, your query will only be executed against the repositories that currently have a CodeQL database available to download. The best way to make a repository available for variant analysis is to enable code scanning with CodeQL. For information about enabling code scanning using CodeQL, see "`Configuring code scanning automatically <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/code-scanning/automatically-scanning-your-code-for-vulnerabilities-and-errors/configuring-code-scanning-for-a-repository#configuring-code-scanning-automatically>`__."
```

The core functionality of the CodeQL extension helps you write queries and run them locally against a CodeQL database. In contrast, variant analysis allows you to send your CodeQL query to GitHub.com to be tested against a list of repositories.

When you run variant analysis against a list of repositories, your query is run against each repository that has a CodeQL database available to analyze. GitHub creates and stores CodeQL databases for thousands of public repositories, including every repository that runs code scanning using CodeQL. If you want to include your repositories in variant analysis, you need to enable code scanning using CodeQL on GitHub.com before adding your repository to a list for analysis. For information about enabling code scanning using CodeQL, see "`Configuring code scanning automatically <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/code-scanning/automatically-scanning-your-code-for-vulnerabilities-and-errors/configuring-code-scanning-for-a-repository#configuring-code-scanning-automatically>`__."

.. _controller-repository:

> About the controller repository
> -------------------------------

Reviewer: I'd really like to reduce the entire section about the controller repository if possible as i think it could be quite distracting. Ultimately the user has a simple choice:

* make the controller repo public to analyze public codebases 
* make the controller repo private to analyze private codebases (different billing applies)

```suggestion
Setting a controller repository for variant analysis
-------------------------------------------------
```

> When you run variant analysis, the analysis is run entirely using dynamic workflows for GitHub Actions. You don't need to create any workflows, but you must specify which GitHub repository the CodeQL extension should use as the "controller repository."

Reviewer: I think we can incorporate some details from elsewhere into this section.

```suggestion
When you run variant analysis, the analysis is run entirely using GitHub Actions. You don't need to create any workflows, but you must specify which GitHub repository the CodeQL extension should use as the "controller repository." Controller repositories can be empty, but they must have at least one commit and the ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` must have "Read and write permissions" when running workflows. For more information, see "`Managing GitHub Actions settings for a repository <https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/enabling-features-for-your-repository/managing-github-actions-settings-for-a-repository#setting-the-permissions-of-the-github_token-for-your-repository>`__."
```

> Functions of the controller repository
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> - **Workflow management:** the workflow runs that are triggered when you run variant analysis are shown on the **Actions** tab for the repository in much the same as other workflow runs.
> - **Billing:** when you analyze private repositories, the actions minutes used by CodeQL analysis are billed to the owner of the controller repository.
> 
> Requirements of the controller repository
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> - The repository must have at least one commit. 
> - The ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` must have "Read and write permissions" when running workflows in this repository. For more information, see "`Managing GitHub Actions settings for a repository <https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/enabling-features-for-your-repository/managing-github-actions-settings-for-a-repository#setting-the-permissions-of-the-github_token-for-your-repository>`__."

Reviewer: I think we can move this elsewhere (see other suggestions).

```suggestion
```

> - The repository visibility must be "public" if you plan to analyze public repositories. The variant analysis will be free.
> - The repository visibility must be "private" or "internal" if you need to analyze private and internal repositories. Any actions minutes used by variant analysis, above the free limit, will be charged to the repository owner. For more information about free minutes and billing, see "`About billing for GitHub Actions <https://docs.github.com/en/billing/managing-billing-for-github-actions/about-billing-for-github-actions>`__." 

Reviewer: Perhaps we could turn this into a pull quote for emphasis?

```suggestion
.. pull-quote::
   
   Note

   - The controller repository visibility can be "public" if you plan to analyze public repositories. The variant analysis will be free.
   - The controller repository visibility must be "private" if you need to analyze any private repositories. Any actions minutes used by variant analysis, above the free limit, will be charged to the repository owner. For more information about free minutes and billing, see "`About billing for GitHub Actions <https://docs.github.com/en/billing/managing-billing-for-github-actions/about-billing-for-github-actions>`__." 
```

TODO: Check on "internal" repositories.

> .. pull-quote::
> 
>     Note
> 
>     You can update your settings to use a different controller repository when you want to run variant analysis on a different group of repositories. For example, if you have finished testing the query on open source code and now want to test it on your private code. However, you must wait until any previous analysis is complete before you change the controller repository.

Reviewer: I think we can safely leave this out.
```suggestion
```

> TODO: check that the guess in the note above is accurate.
> 
> Setting up variant analysis
> ---------------------------
> 
> You can configure the CodeQL extension to run variant analysis by defining a controller repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TODO: check that the guess in the note above is accurate.

Setting up variant analysis
---------------------------

You can define a controller repository before running your first variant analysis.
```

#. Type the owner and name of the repository on GitHub.com that you want to use as your controller repository and press the **Enter** key.

#. If you are prompted to authenticate with GitHub, follow the instructions and sign into your pesonal or organization account. When you have finished following the process, a prompt from GitHub Authentication may ask for permission to open a URI in Visual Studio Code, click **Open**.

The name of the controller repository is saved in your settings for the CodeQL extension. For information on how to edit the controller repository, see ":ref:`Customizing settings <customizing-settings>`."

Running a query at scale using variant analysis
-----------------------------------------------

#. Expand the **Variant Analysis Repositories** section, to show the default lists of the top 10, top 100, and top 1000 public repositories on GitHub.com. These are ranked by considering various metrics such as number of stars, number of watchers, number of forks etc.

#. Select which GitHub repository or repositories you want to run your query against.

>    - Select **Top X repositories**.
>    - Click **Add new database**, the **+** icon, to select either a single repository, or all repositories in an organization.
>    - Click **LIST-NAME** to select a custom list that you have created previously.
>    - Click **Add new list**, the folder icon, to create a custom list (see later in this article for details).

Reviewer: I hope this will be obvious in the UI.

```suggestion
```

Author: I would tend towards keeping this. Unless I've misunderstood, "Add new database" seems to have two uses:

1. Add a repository or organization to the panel, as-is.
2. Add a repository to the currently selected custom list.

        .. image:: ../images/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/variant-analysis-repo-lists.png
            :width: 350
            :alt: Screenshot of the CodeQL extension in Visual Studio Code. The "Variant Analysis Repositories" section is expanded and the header buttons are highlighted with a dark orange outline. The "Top 10 repositories" item has a checkmark to show that it is currently selected.

#. Open the query you want to run, right-click in the query file, and select **CodeQL: Run Variant Analysis** to start variant analysis.

> The CodeQL extension builds a CodeQL pack with your library and any library dependencies. The CodeQL pack and your selected repository list are posted to an API endpoint on GitHub.com which triggers a GitHub Actions dynamic workflow in your controller repository. The workflow spins up multiple parallel jobs to execute the CodeQL query against the repositories in the list, optimizing query execution. As each workflow run finishes, the results are processed and displayed in a variant analysis results view in Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: Small detail.

```suggestion
The CodeQL extension builds a CodeQL pack with your library and any library dependencies. The CodeQL pack and your selected repository list are posted to an API endpoint on GitHub.com which triggers a GitHub Actions dynamic workflow in your controller repository. The workflow spins up multiple parallel jobs to execute the CodeQL query against the repositories in the list, optimizing query execution. As each repository is analyzed, the results are processed and displayed in a variant analysis results view in Visual Studio Code.
```

.. image:: ../images/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/variant-analysis-results-view.png
    :alt: Screenshot of the "Variant Analysis Results" view showing a partially complete run. Analysis of ``angular/angular`` is still running but all other results are displayed. ``facebook/create-react-app`` has three results for this query.

When your variant analysis run is scheduled, the results view automatically opens. Initially the view shows a list of every repository that was scheduled for analysis. As each repository is analyzed, the view is updated to show a summary of the number of results. To view the detailed results for a repository (including results paths), click the repository name.

For each repository, you can see:

- Number of results found by the query
- Visibility of the repository
- Whether analysis is still running (black, moving circle) or finished (green checkmark)
- Number of stars the repository has on GitHub

> - How long ago the CodeQL database that was analyzed was created

Reviewer: This is actually the time the repo was last updated (which can be various different events, not just a commit). We've had several goes at choosing the wording and there is always this confusion 😬 

```suggestion
- How long ago the repository was last updated
```

Author: 🤔 - so the repository could have been updated 5 minutes ago, but the CodeQL database might be a week old because analysis is broken? Or do we only analyze repositories where the CodeQL database is reasonably up to date for the codebase?

Reviewer: >so the repository could have been updated 5 minutes ago, but the CodeQL database might be a week old because analysis is broken? Or do we only analyze repositories where the CodeQL database is reasonably up to date for the codebase?

That's right. We have no clever ways of filtering repos based on when they were last updated.

Those metrics (stars, last updated) give the researcher some insight into the repos they are targeting: high star count = popular so impactful if a bug is found. Not updated recently = outdated and possibly vulnerable code.

To see the results for a repository:

.. image:: ../images/codeql-for-visual-studio-code/variant-analysis-result.png
    :alt: Screenshot of an example result in the "Variant Analysis Results" view. The result has blue links to the source files in GitHub so you can go straight to the repository to fix the problem. There is also a "Show paths" link because this is a data flow query.

#. Click the repository name to show a summary of each result.

#. Explore the information available for each result using links to the source files in GitHub.com and, for data flow queries, the **Show paths** link. For more information, see "ref:`Exploring data flow with path queries <exploring-data-flow-with-path-queries>`."

Exporting your results
----------------------

> You can export your results for further analysis or to discuss them with collaborators. In the results view, click **Export results** to export the results to a gist on GitHub.com or to a markdown file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can export your results for further analysis or to discuss them with collaborators. In the results view, click **Export results** to export the results to a secret gist on GitHub.com or to a markdown file.
```

Creating custom lists of repositories
---------------------------------------

> After you have defined a controller repository, the Variant analysis repositories panel shows the lists of repositories that you can select for variant analysis. You can use the options in the panel header to select a specific repository or organization for variant analysis, and to create and manage custom lists of repositories for variant analysis.

Reviewer: You have to add repos/orgs to the panel before running a variant analysis. You can't do one-off runs anymore.

```suggestion
After you have defined a controller repository, the Variant analysis repositories panel shows the lists of repositories that you can select for variant analysis. You can use the options in the panel header to create and manage custom lists of repositories for variant analysis.
```

Author: Wording updated locally.
